docs: Add documentation for `Endpoint` inheritance (#268)
serverpod/serverpod_docs: docs/06-concepts/01-working-with-endpoints.md

## Ignore endpoint definition

> If you want the code generator to ignore an endpoint definition, you can annotate the class with `@ignoreEndpoint`, imported from `serverpod_shared/annotations.dart`.  This can be useful if you want to keep the definition in your codebase without generating server or client bindings for it.

Author: Removed the extra import here and in the examples for now, as my current feeling is that we'll re-export the annotations (due to the alternatives not being clear wins for now, maybe something to re-think in v3 if package dependencies should change).

```

The above code will not generate any server or client bindings for the example endpoint.

Alternatively you can disable single methods like in the example below, where `hello` is exposed to the client, but `goodbye` is not:

```dart
import 'package:serverpod/serverpod.dart';

class ExampleEndpoint extends Endpoint {
  Future<String> hello(Session session, String name) async {
    return 'Hello $name';
  }

  @ignoreEndpoint
  Future<String> goodbye(Session session, String name) async {
    return 'Bye $name';
  }
}
```

## Endpoint inheritance

It is possible to extend existing endpoints, from your own app or other modules, by subclassing them. In case the parent endpoint was marked as `abstract` or `@ignoreEndpoint`, no client code is generated for it, but a client will be generated for your subclass – as long as it does not opt-out by any of the aforementioned ways.

> ```dart

Author: Do you think the code example are fine to follow to see the changes?

I grouped the many variants in one, as otherwise there's too much boilerplate if hide, show, override / extend all get their own section (and there are still further variants possible and not mentioned here, like extending in a backwards compatible way by adding an optional parameter on the base class etc.).

import 'package:serverpod/serverpod.dart';

> abstract class GreeterBase extends Endpoint {

Author: Alternatively we could also use some recipe related examples, if that is the new direction 👨‍🍳

>   Future<String> hello(Session session, String name) async {

Reviewer: Suggestion: Break each of these cases out into different sections and target them specifically.

The sections could be:
- - inheritance between concrete classes.
- abstract class with hello endpoint.
- abstract class with require login
- abstract class with ignoreEndpoint
- abstract class with hello endpoint with an override in the concrete class.

And probably in that order. Try to make the examples "real world" examples if possible.

This should make it a bit easier to gauge the capability of inheritance.

Author: Before I was worried that going into detail on each would be a bit long (as the current docs seem rather succinct).

But now having changed it, I already like it better, as for each case we can give a clearer explanation and it does not get "blurred" into other behaviors. This should also be much better for sharing, e.g. if one wants to suggest: Hey I think this pattern could be improved by doing what's explained here etc.

    return 'Hello $name';
  }

  Future<String> goodbye(Session session, String name) async {
    return 'Bye $name';
  }

  @ignoreEndpoint
  Future<String> wave(Session session) async {
    return '👋';
  }

  Future<String> wavePerson(Session session, String name) async {
    return '👋 Hey $name';
  }
}

class ExcitedGreeter extends GreeterBase {
  @override
  Future<String> hello(Session session, String name) async {
    return '${super.hello(session, name)}!!!';
  }

>   // to expose `wave` on the sub-class, override it like this to drop the `@ignoreEndpoint` annotation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // to enable `wave` which was marked with `@ignoreEndpoint` on the sub-class, you can override and call the `super` implementation. This will create the method on the endpoint.
```

Reviewer 2: Took me a bit to understand whats going on here 🫣 - but nice that this is now possible :)

Author: ```suggestion
  // to enable `wave` which was marked with `@ignoreEndpoint` on the base class, you can override it on the sub-class and call the `super` implementation. This will create the method on the endpoint.
```

In the original suggestion it should be the base class (which had ignored the method). Maybe this is clearer (or too verbose 😅)

  // @override
  // Future<String> wave(Session session) async {
  //   return super.wave(session);
  // }

  @override
  @ignoreEndpoint
  Future<String> wavePerson(Session session, String name) async {
    throw UnimplementedError();
  }
}
```

In the above example `ExcitedGreeter` inherits from `GreeterBase`. Since the base class is marked as `abstract` no client was generated for it, but now all of its visible endpoint methods would be exposed through the sub-class `ExcitedGreeter`.

> The sub-class applies the following modifications though:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The sub-class `ExcitedGreeter` is an example for all possible modifications to the abstract base class
```

Author: ```suggestion
The sub-class `ExcitedGreeter` is an example for all possible modifications to the abstract base class and contains the following changes:
```

- `hello` is overriden and augments the super class' implementation with a trailing `!!!`
- `goodbye` is now exposed through the sub-class, as it was not individually hidden and the sub-class does not further augment it
- `wave`, which is explictly ignored in the base-class is still not exposed, as the sub-class did not opt into re-exposing it
- `wavePerson` was explicitly overriden to be ignored. Don't worry about the `throw` in the method implementation, which is only needed to satisfy the compiler. In practice this method can not be called from the client anymore.

### API versioning for breaking changes

> Endpoint sub-class can be useful when having to do a breaking change on an endpoint, but you want to keep sharing most of it's implementation with the old endpoint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Endpoint sub-class can be useful when having to do a breaking change on an endpoint, but you need to keep supporting existing clients. Doing so also allows you to keep sharing most of it's implementation with the old endpoint.
```

Author: ```suggestion
An endpoint sub-class can be useful when having to do a breaking change on an endpoint, but you need to keep supporting existing clients. Doing so also allows you to keep sharing most of its implementation with the old endpoint.
```

> ### API versioning for breaking changes

Reviewer: Suggestion: Move this to the `backwards compatibility` page and integrate it with the text there.

Reviewer: Rewrite looked good! 👍

> Imagine you had a "team" management endpoint where before a user could join if they had an e-mail address ending in the expected domain, but now it should be opened up for anyone to join if they can provide an "invite code".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Imagine you had a "team" management endpoint where before, a user could join if they had an e-mail address ending in the expected domain, but now it should be opened up for anyone to join if they can provide an "invite code".
```

```dart
@Deprecated('Use TeamV2Endpoint instead')
class TeamEndpoint extends Endpoint {
  Future<TeamInfo> join(Session session) async { … }
  
  // many more methods, like `leave` etc.
}

> class TeamV2Endpoint extends TeamEndpoint {

Reviewer 2: I think we should try to come up with a good naming convention for versioning which is not suffixing numbers - let's maybe discuss this in a bigger round to get more brains involved :)

Author: Happy to take suggestions. I think while not the nicest (especially since going from "" to "v2"), it is the most common pattern I know of, given that the core entity retains its name.

I think this is also what people would put into their REST API paths, etc.

But you're right, maybe for Serverpod specifically we could do better, e.g. deprecating the old one and thus keeping the default at "team" whereas the old one would become "teamV1" or similar on the client (which the protocol of course staying stable, just the client code-generation behaving in a way so that it looks "evergreen").

Author: @dkbast: FYI @SandPod just mentioned an idea that `@deprecated` on an endpoint could mean "do not generate a client for this anymore".

That way you could keep the old endpoint protocol alive for a little longer, but get a guarantee that you stopped using it in the next update etc.

That would then also free `client.*` for whatever replacement the developer comes up with.

  @override
  @ignoreEndpoint
  Future<TeamInfo> join(Session session) async {
    throw UnimplementedError();
  }

  Future<TeamInfo> joinWithCode(Session session, String invitationCode) async {
    …
  }
}
```

In the above example, we created a new `TeamV2` endpoint, which hides the `join` method and instead exposes a `joinWithCode` method, plus all the other inherited (and untouched) methods from the parent class.

While we may have liked to re-use the `join` method name, Dart inheritance rules do not allow doing so.

> In your client, you could then move all usages from `client.team` to `client.teamV2` and eventually remove the old endpoint. Either by marking it with `@ignoreEndpoint` on the class or deleting it and moving the untouched method implementations you want to keep to the V2 endpoint class.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In your client, you could then move all usages from `client.team` to `client.teamV2` and eventually remove the old endpoint. Either mark it with `@ignoreEndpoint` on the class or delete it and move the untouched method implementations you want to keep to the V2 endpoint class.
```

> An alternative pattern to consider would be to move all the business logic for an endpoint into a helper class, and then call into that from the endpoint. In case you want to create a V2 version later, you might be able to reuse most of the underlying business logic through that helper class, and don't have to sub-class the old endpoint. This has the added benefit of the endpoint class clearly listing all exposed methods, and you don't have to wonder what you inherit from the base class.

Author: Personally I think as a general "API evolution" approach the externalized business logic and 2 concrete implementations seem better for the common case.

I think extending endpoints is really more suitable in the module -> app case we discussed, where you do it to minimally modify / extend behavior and not do what otherwise would be breaking changes.

> An alternative pattern to consider would be to move all the business logic for an endpoint into a helper class, and then call into that from the endpoint. In case you want to create a V2 version later, you might be able to reuse most of the underlying business logic through that helper class, and don't have to sub-class the old endpoint. This has the added benefit of the endpoint class clearly listing all exposed methods, and you don't have to wonder what you inherit from the base class.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An alternative pattern to consider would be to move all the business logic for an endpoint into a helper class and then call into that from the endpoint. In case you want to create a V2 version later, you might be able to reuse most of the underlying business logic through that helper class, and don't have to sub-class the old endpoint. This has the added benefit of the endpoint class clearly listing all exposed methods, and you don't have to wonder what you inherit from the base class.
```

> Either approach has its pros and cons, and it depends on the concrete circumstances to pick the one that is most useful. Both give you all the tools you need to extend and update your API while moving clients along gracefully, giving them time to update.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Either approach has pros and cons, and it depends on the concrete circumstances to pick the most useful one. Both give you all the tools you need to extend and update your API while gracefully moving clients along and giving them time to update.
```

Author: Haha, funny moving "gracefully" to "the end" was what it suggested to me earlier :D

```dart
import 'package:serverpod/serverpod.dart';

class ExampleEndpoint extends Endpoint {
  Future<String> hello(Session session, String name) async {
    return 'Hello $name';
  }

  @ignoreEndpoint
  Future<String> goodbye(Session session, String name) async {
    return 'Bye $name';
  }
}
```

## Endpoint method inheritance

Endpoints can be based on other endpoints using inheritance, like `class ChildEndpoint extends ParentEndpoint`. If the parent endpoint was marked as `abstract` or `@ignoreEndpoint`, no client code is generated for it, but a client will be generated for your subclass – as long as it does not opt out again.

Currently, there are the following possibilities to extend another `Endpoint` class:

### Inheriting from a concrete (visible) endpoint

```dart
import 'package:serverpod/serverpod.dart';

class Calculator extends Endpoint {
  Future<int> add(Session session, int a, int b) async {
    return a + b;
  }
}
```

```dart
import 'package:serverpod/serverpod.dart';

class MyCalculator extends Calculator {
  Future<int> subtract(Session session, int a, int b) async {
    return a - b;
  }
}
```

> The generated code will now contain both a `Calculator` and `MyCalculator` client.  

Author: I adapted the pattern such that the first sentence(s) after each example code (a single one per section now) list the exposed methods.

I did not rewrite it into the `client.x.y` style though, as that seems a little further detached from the example, and also varied the expressions a little bit depending on the focus of the example so that it does not read quite as "mechanical" (as its text, not a table). Let me know what you think :)

The `MyCalculator` endpoint will not expose both `add` and `subtract` methods.

To prevent usage of the base `Calculator` endpoint, it might be appropriate to hide it.

> If the base class was defined in another module as shown above, then this is currently not possible. But if it's part of your own code, you could use the `@ignoreEndpoint` annotation from the previous section, or make it `abstract` as shown below.

Author: The basic idea behind the `abstract` endpoints in the package was that now no split is needed (at least not for the endpoint exposing per se), but the developer still gets the flexibility to opt into or augment the provided endpoint.

But you're right, this probably warrants some explanation to clearly state why you would want to do this.

For "auth 2.0" this gets complicated a bit further as we do still split some packages, but now not in order to give control over the exposed endpoint(s), but due to the dependencies (e.g. `auth_email_account` (the "core") will only depend on the "auth2", whereas `auth_email` (the endpoint) will depend on the default session and user profile implementation, offering a drop-in solution).

But maybe even that is worthwhile information to put in, to explain in which case this might be most useful, and what other aspects to consider.

> If the base class was defined in another module as shown above, then this is currently not possible. But if it's part of your own code, you could use the `@ignoreEndpoint` annotation from the previous section, or make it `abstract` as shown below.

Author: Removed, but added a similar explicit warning to the case where one is trying to hide a method from a non-abstract/ignored endpoint, as that still leaves the method externally available by using the super class's endpoint.

### Inheriting from an `abstract` base class

Endpoints marked as `abstract` require that they get subclassed to be exposed on the server.

Suppose you had the following base class:

```dart
import 'package:serverpod/serverpod.dart';

abstract class Calculator extends Endpoint {
  Future<int> add(Session session, int a, int b) async {
    return a + b;
  }
}
```

So far, this would not generate any client or server code.

If you then added a subclass that extends this base class, this subclass would be exposed to clients.

```dart
import 'package:serverpod/serverpod.dart';

class MyCalculator extends Calculator {}

> ```

Author: all examples changed to 1 code snippet per heading.

This `MyCalculator` endpoint now exposes the `add` endpoint method from the base class implementation. You could further extend it like this:

```dart
import 'package:serverpod/serverpod.dart';

class MyCalculator extends Calculator {
  Future<int> subtract(Session session, int a, int b) async {
    return a - b;
  }
}
```

> Now the `MyCalculator` endpoint exposes the inherited `add` endpoint method as well as `subtract`.

Author: done, added the extra section.

> ### Inheriting from an `@ignoreEndpoint` base class

Author: ```suggestion
### Inheriting from `Endpoint` class marked with `@ignoreEndpoint`
```

Maybe like this?

> ### Inheriting from an `@ignoreEndpoint` base class

Reviewer: Yeah, that is even better!

> ### Inheriting from an `@ignoreEndpoint` base class

Reviewer: Would be neat to get the headers a bit more similair so that it is easy to pattern match your specific case?

> ### Inheriting from an `@ignoreEndpoint` base class

Author: Aligned the headers for subclassing and method hide/show respectively.

Suppose you had an endpoint class marked with `@ignoreEndpoint`, in which case no code would be generated for it.

```dart
import 'package:serverpod/serverpod.dart';

@ignoreEndpoint
class Calculator extends Endpoint {
  Future<int> add(Session session, int a, int b) async {
    return a + b;
  }
}
```

You could then subclass it like this:

```dart
import 'package:serverpod/serverpod.dart';

class MyCalculator extends Calculator {}
```

Now, all of the public endpoint methods of the base class, in this case just `add`, would be exposed by the `MyCalculator` client.
Additionally, further methods could be added to the `MyCalculator` subclass.

### Overriding endpoint methods

> Suppose you had a base `Endpoint` class `Greeter` whose behavior you want to adopt.

Author: Done in 739337c1fe740d129ff1e91324cdc536974f6930

```dart
import 'package:serverpod/serverpod.dart';

> abstract class GreeterBase extends Endpoint {

Author: I am for it :)

Let's start that separately and then update the docs in one swoop.

```

The above code will not generate any server or client bindings for the example endpoint.

### Ignore individual `Endpoint` methods

Alternatively, you can disable single methods by annotation them with `@ignoreEndpoint`.

```dart
import 'package:serverpod/serverpod.dart';

class ExampleEndpoint extends Endpoint {
  Future<String> hello(Session session, String name) async {
    return 'Hello $name';
  }

  @ignoreEndpoint
  Future<String> goodbye(Session session, String name) async {
    return 'Bye $name';
  }
}
```

In this case, the `ExampleEndpoint` will only expose the `hello` method, whereas the `goodbye` method will not be accessible externally.

## Endpoint method inheritance

Endpoints can be based on other endpoints using inheritance, like `class ChildEndpoint extends ParentEndpoint`. If the parent endpoint was marked as `abstract` or `@ignoreEndpoint`, no client code is generated for it, but a client will be generated for your subclass – as long as it does not opt out again.

Currently, there are the following possibilities to extend another `Endpoint` class:

### Inheriting from a concrete (visible) `Endpoint` class

> Suppose there is an existing `CalculatorEndpoint` (presumably defined in another package, otherwise the existing one could be adapted) which you want to extend with further functionality.

Reviewer: Suggestion(NIT - use your judgement here): Could be rephrased as `Given an existing `Endpoint` class, it is possible to extend or modify its behavior without modifying the already exposed methods.

Then we can stay away from the other package talk. That could maybe be mentioned in the introduction?

"Inheritance gives you the possibility to modify the behavior of endpoints defined in other serverpod modules"?

Author: You're right, there is no reason for that info to live under this heading and not e.g. the `abstract` one etc. 

So I moved it to the higher up introduction as suggested :)

### Unhiding endpoint methods with `@ignoreEndpoint`

The reverse of the previous example would be a base endpoint that has a method marked with `@ignoreEndpoint`, which you now want to expose on the subclass.

```dart
import 'package:serverpod/serverpod.dart';

abstract class CalculatorEndpoint extends Endpoint {
  Future<int> add(Session session, int a, int b) async {
    return a + b;
  }

  // Ignored, as this expensive computation should not be exposed by default
  @ignoreEndpoint
  Future<BigInt> addBig(Session session, BigInt a, BigInt b) async {
    return a + b;
  }
}

class MyCalculatorEndpoint extends CalculatorEndpoint {
  @override
  Future<BigInt> addBig(Session session, BigInt a, BigInt b) async {
    return super.addBig(session, a, b);
  }
}
```

Since `CalculatorEndpoint` is `abstract` it will not be exposed on the server. `MyCalculatorEndpoint` will expose both the `add` and `addBig` methods, since `addBig` was overridden and thus lost the `@ignoreEndpoint` annotation.

> ### Building base endpoints for behavior

Reviewer: Suggestion(NIT): Should this be at the top? Feels like this might be the most common scenario?

Author: Not sure, I think it's nice from the original ticket, but not necessarily something most people would do. Maybe a `mixin` would be more appropriate here, as you can really only have 1 parent and thus doing this tiny change to `requireLogin => true` personally feels not like much to intercept the class hierarchy. Maybe this is indeed more useful with scopes? (But then again, the login + admin endpoint is a bit misleading, because it'd suffice to just specify `scopes => {admin}`, as you can not get a scope (with the default tools) without being backed by a logged in user 🤷🏻‍♂️.)

I think the "normal" extension will get more relevant when we start shipping `abstract` endpoints ourselves, in which case this is a concept the developer must be aware of, whereas these non-endpoint method related things are optional.

Reviewer: Although another method of implementation might be preferred, determining access rights for a group of endpoints is still a useful feature.

That gives you the possibility to have classes such as `EditRightsEndpoints` or `AuthenticatedEndpoints`.

Not sure where it should live in the documentation, just think the functionality is really useful for code clarity.

Reviewer: Keeping as is for now!
